Cancer is currently considered to be
caused by genes. I get that that's the
like the prevalent view or genetic
changes. Anyway, so you've conducted the
rigorous research as you said about the
metabolic and mitochondrial theory or
origin of cancer. So can you tell about
how the mitochondria and mitochondrial
metabolism contribute to cancer?
Yeah. Well, first you you're correct. Um
right now the the current view of that
cancer is a genetic disease uh under the
what we call the somatic mutation theory
uh which is worldwide
uh to be thought of in all major all
major western societies based uh on the
national institute
um and most of the cancer institutes of
all major western countries ries uh will
say that cancer is a genetic disease. Um
and this this drives
um the research as well as the
treatments. Um and uh it's important to
recognize
that uh the second major theory which
the correct is the correct one where
that is cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disorder based on the
mitochondrial metabolic theory of
cancer. So we have two major competitive
theories that are attempt that have
attempted to explain uh the origin and
progression of of cancer. Okay. Um what
what I have uh done is um looked back at
the work of Otto Warberg, the German
scientist
uh to determine whether his ideas might
be more accurate to explain the origin
of cancer than the current somatic
mutation uh theory of cancer. And um
let's look at this according once you
realize
that the accuracy which of the two
theories can better explain the origin
and progression of the disease should
determine then the ways that we try to
prevent or manage the disorder. Okay. So
today you have to realize worldwide
cancer is out of control. Um we are not
dropping death rates in any area of the
world. Uh cancer is increasing
uh in all major populations. Um so
clearly uh the last 50 years uh thinking
that cancer is a genetic disease hasn't
led to any real um improvements in o in
in overall uh progression for your
overall survival. So um and according to
the sematic mutation theory, the
accumulation of of mutations in the
nuclear DNA is responsible for the
disregulated growth uh of of these
cells. Um so let's let's consider that
for a minute. Now what what is often not
before I get into why it's a
mitochondrial metabolic disease let's
look at the shortcoming of the dominant
theory that says it is a genetic disease
so um according to the somatic mutation
theory somatic mutations which mean
mutations in the DNA of cells in a
tissue as oppo as opposed to germline
something that you would inherit
okay so sematic mutations cause the
disregulation
of of cells in a particular tissue or
organ and leading to cancer. But what is
not discussed is that there are some
cancers where mutations have not been
found. Um yet we have disregulated cell
growth and and people don't even know
about this. They don't they either
choose not to to know about it. Then
there's they broke down. Not all of the
somatic mutations are actually
contributo
towards disregulated cell growth. So
they've made a different group of
mutations called driver. These are
called driver gene mutations. They drive
the disregulated growth because they are
thought to play an important role in
some aspect of cellular biology.
Okay. So now over the last few years
more and more research has been found
showing that we find all of these driver
mutations in normal tissues of our body
that have no disregulated growth. So
this is kind of unusual. How do you
explain some tumors that have no
mutations and then normal cells that
have driver mutations that never become
cancer? Um this is the field says uh oh
we haven't figured that out yet. uh
we're still trying to close the
knowledge gap rather than saying maybe
we're wrong, maybe cancer is not a
genetic disease. Oh no, they won't they
won't accept that. So and then we know
from the nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments that when you take the
nucleus of a tumor cell and move it into
a new fresh cytoplasm, you have
regulated growth. And if you take the
nucleus from a normal cell and put it
into a tumor cell cytoplasm, you have
disregulated growth. Completely ruling
out a nuclear-driven process to
disregulated cell growth. All fingers
pointing to something in the cytoplasm
of the cell. And that something is the
mitochondria, the organel that generates
energy and metabolic homeostasis uh
within the cell. Okay. So now we have
the mitochondrial metabolic theory which
was originated with the work of Otto
Warberg and has been since expanded upon
by by us uh correcting a lot of the
misunderstanding that was associated
with Warberg's original original
findings. Warberg said all cancers
originate from a disruption of oxidative
energy metabolism. number one. And
number two, this was coupled by a
compensatory
substrate level or fermentation uh
energy without oxygen.
So um I looked into this uh for 20 more
than 20 years. I did research on this
and I concluded that out of Worerberg
was essentially correct. We have never
found a tumor cell with a normal number,
structure and function of mitochondria
in the cytoplasm regardless of the
genetic mutations.
Um so uh all major cancers are
fermenting. They're getting energy from
uh non oxidative non oxygen uh
mechanisms. This all supports what Otto
Warberg said. Now we are cleaning up the
mess that was associated with the
misunderstanding of Otto Warberg's uh
ideas and we're showing that cancer
oxygen consumption in cancer cell is not
linked to uh um ATP energy through
oxidative phosphorilation. Lactic acid
production in cancer cells is not an
accurate marker for energy through
fermentation. and we're starting to uh
say why this is the case a and um how to
improve our understanding. So we so far
we have been unable to find any tumor
cell that can live without glucose and
the amino acid glutamine meaning that
all major cancers are dependent on these
two fuels for disregulated cell growth.
This is because the energy from oxygen
in the mitochondria is dysfunctional. So
the cell must go to a non oxidative
mechanism which is fermentation driven
by two fuels glucose and glutamine. The
mutations in the nucleus uh of cancer
cells are downstream effects of the
damage to the energy metabolism. So most
of what people say the world is saying
cancer is a genetic disease and we're
saying those mutations are not the cause
of disregulated growth but the effects
of energy metabolism defect. So when you
put it in that context, this changes the
whole view uh of how we prevent and
manage cancer uh relative to what we're
doing today with all these toxic poisons
uh imunotherapies uh all these kinds of
things which are very very expensive.
They cause harm to the body and they're
not effective for managing the majority
of cancers in any country of the world.
Thank you so much uh of that thorough
explanation. Before we go into talking
about these therapies and the metabolic
therapies, um I'll make a brief summary
and please correct me if I'm wrong. So
what I'm understanding is that we have
confused the chicken and the egg.
Instead of genes driving the cancer,
there's something that happens in the
mitochondria, which is basically that
they cannot use oxygen for making ATP
that we would usually use in our
mitochondria through oxidative
phosphorilation.
So they utilize this backup mechanism
almost quote unquote uh where they
produce lactate where they ferment
glucose and glutamine. Mhm.
Um so why does a a cell that ferment
glucose and glutamine and use this
alternative fermentation mechanism why
does that have a disregulated growth?
Why does it spread like cancer cell
does?
Yes that's very that's a exceptionally
important question um because the
organel that controls the cell cycle and
the differentiated quiescent state is
the mitochondria. The proton the
gradient inside the mitochondria
controls calcium signaling in the cell.
Calcium signaling ultimately uh
regulates the cyclones in the cell
cycle. So uh the organel that's supposed
to maintain the cocent differentiated
state gradually loses grip uh of of
maintaining the metabolic homeostasis
and as the cells begin because if that
part of the energy is is disrupted um
the cell will die unless it can
compensate by upregulation of
fermentation. if it can't uh so there's
two there's two things that Warberg said
if you block oxygen uh uh energy too
quickly too acutely you will kill the
cell and it can never become a tumor
cell. So it's got to be a chronic
disruption of oxidative phosphorilation
energy through oxygen allowing the cell
time to upregulate these ancient
pathways of fermentation. So if a cell
cannot upregulate fermentation, it will
never become a tumor cell because all
tumor cells are fermenting glucose and
glutamine when you when you examine
them. Now the interesting thing there
are a couple of cells in our bodies that
cannot do this and they are cardiac
myioytes which are the the the muscle of
the heart that's constantly beating
filled with mitochondria.
uh and if you block the mitochondria,
the heart muscle stops and you have a
heart attack. So it it cannot sustain a
shift to fermentation and still maintain
the same level of metabolic efficiency.
The other cell is neurons in the brain.
They can ferment the heart and the
neurons can ferment robustly for about
five minutes uh and then they die. they
can't they can't gradually compensate
for lost oxidative phosphorilation over
time. So you rarely if ever find uh
cancer involving cardiomyioytes or
neurons in the central nervous system.
So that tells us like Warberg said
you've got to have cells that can
transition from oxidative
phosphorilation to this glucose
glutamine fermentation if you're going
to get cancer which is disregulated cell
growth. And you also have to realize
that the default state of mamalian cells
is proliferation.
And what when the mitochondria that
control the differentiated state and
maintain quiescent gradually lose their
ability to produce energy efficiently,
the cell enters its default state which
is proliferation driven by fermentation
metabolism. from our knowledge that all
cells on our planet were driven by
fermentation before oxygen came into the
atmosphere two and a half billion years
ago. Every all the cells were fermenting
at that time. In our tissues today,
those pathways are heirlooms of the
ancient path past. And when oxidative
phosphorilation gradually becomes
dysfunctional, those ancient heirloom
pathways now become dominant. And they
are leading to this disregulated cell
growth, out of control, because the
organel that's supposed to control them
is now dysfunctional. They bypass
programmed cell death and they
proliferate like crazy driven by a
fermentation metabolism. And just as in
the past uh there was no regulation of
cell growth. This fermentation was
associated with unbridled proliferation
and would stop only when the fermentable
fuels in the environment became depleted
and then the cells would die. So what we
have today in cancer as long as those
cells have access to fermentation fuels
which are predominantly glucose and
glutamine they continue to grow and
they're very hard to kill. The simple
way to kill them is remove the
fermentation fuels and transition the
body over to a non-fermentable fuel like
fatty acids and ketone bodies which help
our normal cells but cannot be used by
the tumor cells. So we marginalize the
energy metabolism of the tumor cell by
transitioning away from fermentable
fuels to respiratory fuels which the
tumor cells can't use and they become
gradually degraded uh with by by our
normal uh health healing processes
within the body. Um it's a beautiful way
to manage cancer. Uh it's effective when
it's done correctly. The problem is
almost nobody knows what I just told you
is not known or cannot be understood by
the majority of people that do cancer
research or uh treat patients in the
clinics. Uh that's the great mystery.
How is it possible that what I just said
cannot be either understood or accepted
by the majority of people in the field?
That's what the strange thing is,
right? So
the current cancer treatments are
probably one of the most strenous most
difficult experiences for a human to go
through. Can you discuss a little bit
about what we have available now and how
is a metabolic management of cancer
different from this?
Yeah. Well, right now I think everybody
knows it's uh slash poison and burn uh
which is surgical mutilation
uh follow followed by poisonous
chemicals uh followed by radiation. Um
now here here's the interesting thing.
Everybody knows those things are m
medieval. I I think during the Spanish
Inquisition uh the the Dominicans that
tortured heretics uh would be quite
impressed uh with what we do to these
cancer patients in the form of torturing
them. Um you know what we do to these
poor cancer patients is is tragic um
based on our lack of knowledge. So um so
basically uh what we do is we use these
very toxic aggressive approaches which
harm the rest of the body in many many
different ways. Um and I I know uh there
are many many cancer survivors who have
actually survived uh mutilations uh
radiation uh and and poisonous
chemicals. Um but they their bodies are
beat up in many different ways. They
they suffer uh what we call adverse
effects from these toxic treatments and
may and may suffer later on from
recurrence of cancer or uh
neurossychiatric problem, digestive
problem, bone density problems, all
kinds of problems because you survive
extremely toxic treatments to manage
your cancer. Um and now don't forget uh
we continue to do these because the
promise of the genomic projects the
precision medicine uh which was supposed
to replace these medieval treatments has
never been realized. So um we look at
imunotherapies today uh imunotherapies
are also based on the somatic mutation
theory of cancer. So that's the new
thing. Optivo, Katruda, Carti
imunotherapy, all these you hear them
advertised somewhere, at least in in our
country, they're on TV at night and they
tell they spend more time telling you
how the treatment will kill you uh
before it actually helps you. So you
have to real and so you're using drugs
that have a high probability of making
your life worse. Uh yeah there but there
there go there are people who are doing
better but um many of them uh don't do
better and sometimes these therapies
will kill you faster than than the
cancer itself. Um what's going on here?
Why is this why is this happening?
Because those therapies are based on the
somatic mutation theory. And if the
semantic mutation theory like I've just
mentioned is no longer credible, then
you are not going to see any major drops
in death rate because you're treating
patients based on an incorrect theory of
what the nature of the disease is. So
when you do metabolic therapy now you're
targeting the very essence of what's
driving the disregulated growth, the
fuels that are needed for that
disregulated growth. So um you take away
those fuels uh or try to interrupt them
as best as possible which can be done by
uh water only fasting uh which can be
done uh by uh certain drugs and
procedures that interfere with the
availability of glucose and glutamine.
And gradually you you you bring and you
and and you do it at the same time
you're making the rest of the body
healthy. you're you're not harming the
rest of the body with metabolic therapy
because we transition the patient away
from glucose to ketone bodies and fatty
acids which the normal cells can now do
uh use quite effectively because we
evolved to do that. We have to
understand who we are as a species. Homo
sapiens evolved uh from uh uh other
primates about two and a half million
years ago. How did we expand? How did we
exist on the planet during a couple of
ice ages? What did we do as a species to
survive? We were always in a state of
nutritional ketosis because there was no
highly processed carbohydrates available
in the environment at that time. And
that was our existence for hundreds of
thousands of years. Only within the last
50 or 75 years have we found ourselves
confronted by massive doses of of uh
highly processed carbohydrates, minimal
exercise as compared to the past and
stress and all the things of modern
society. So what we do is we uh
recognize who we are as a species, how
we evolved and we try to bring our
bodies back into that state of
paleolithic existence which is reducing
blood sugar and more exercise, getting
the ketones elevated and then we can
come in uh with repurposed drugs that we
know can target the glutamine uh in
these tumor cells. And we do it very
strategically according to our pressed
pulse therapy that we published uh which
then recognizes that glutamine cannot be
targeted aggressively. You have to do it
very uh strategically because that same
fuel not only drives the disregulated
growth of the tumor but it also makes
our immune system keeps our immune
system function. Our gut needs our gut
health requires glutamine. A ura cycle
requires glutamine. So you cannot go in
and target glutamine too aggressively
because you could end up defeating what
your purpose was to make the body
healthy. So glucose is not essential for
our existence. We can switch to ketones
and fatty acids. the tumor cell
absolutely has to have the glucose and
we target the glutamine strategically uh
with pulsing using repurposed drugs and
eventually we degrade slowly degrade the
tumor while enhancing the health and
vitality of the rest of the body. So,
uh, and then you'll you'll gradually see
either a stabilization of the tumor, in
other words, it just stops growing,
never goes away, uh, but it's there, uh,
but it doesn't get worse. Or you
actually get this thing to gradually go
away. And and it and we don't know,
everybody's different. Some people, they
live with it, other people are happy
that it went away. We don't know how
long it went away for, 5, 10, 10 years.
uh all we know is that we are on the
path for a more reasonable way to manage
cancer based on our understanding of
biology, biochemistry and evolutionary
biology. Uh this is the strategy not
this mindless uh stuff uh that we're
doing in the clinics today that are not
based on the mitochondrial metabolic
theory which is the correct theory to
define the nature of cancer. And once
you understand that theory, the
strategies for managing cancer will be
much less toxic and far more therapeutic
than what we currently have in the
clinics today.
Right? So if there is listeners at this
point want to learn about the depth of
this theory, I recommend the book cancer
as a metabolic disease. It's pretty
long, but it's very explanatory. So it
slowly reveals all the details or the
important
um cascades about this theory and why it
ultimately makes most sense for me. It
just it was a huge revelation to read
that book and
like one thing though that I still keep
thinking is that why is the glutamine?
So I understand glucose is fermented and
is fermentable. Um, glutamine is an
amino acid. Is it just glutamine or is
it all other amino acids? Do we It's
like do protein does protein feed
cancer? Does that make sense as a
question?
Well, okay, let's look at we we
interrogated the tumor cells. Uh, we
here's the way we do it. It's very it's
not that complicated. We take our cells
and they you grow them in in culture and
in rich medium um boine uh serum
cap serum and all this beautiful stuff.
If you add glucose and glutamine, you
have um all this cocktail of stuff and
they grow like crazy. They're very
healthy cancer cells.
Then we take away everything. We take
away the serum, we take away the
glucose, we take away the gluten. take
everything away and just grow them in in
a salt solution and uh and then time
them and see how long it takes them to
die. So uh obviously with no food uh no
nutrients uh cells can only survive for
a short period of time and then you time
them. Mouse cells are all dead in 24
hours. Uh human cells are all dead
anywhere from 48 to 72 hours. human
cells uh because our basil metabolic
rate uh in our cells is very slow much
slower than the mouse. So mouse or rat
they they die fast. So once the cells
are um uh uh are then we know okay
they're dead. Now we begin we add stuff
back uh to these cells. So we grow them
in saline and then we add each
individual amino acid back uh by itself
to see what it does. Is there any
evidence that a single amino acid can
maintain the life and viability? And
what we're using, we use
bioluminescence, which is a marker for
ATP, which is energy. So, we're looking
at energy. We're looking to see what
fuel could provide energy for the cell
and keep it from dying. And uh we got
all through all 20 amino acids. And yes,
glutamine is the number one. There's no
question about it. You can get a little
bit from glutamate, maybe a little bit
from aspheragene, but nothing like the
power of glutamine. Then we go through
and look at all the carbohydrates and we
check out and it's glucose for sure is
the number one carbohydrate that can
perk them up. And when you put the two
together, glucose and glutamine, you get
a powerful synergy between these two
fuels that allows the cells to grow
quite robustly even in the absence of
serum. As long as you have these two
fuels and then you say what is the
mechanism by which these fuels are
producing ATP to allow the cell to grow
and live because ATP without ATP nothing
grows so we know the energy currency is
energy it's a adenosine triphosphate
where does it come from it comes from
glucose and glutamine how so autoberg
and others clearly showed that um uh
glucose produces ATP largely through um
glycolysis in the cytoplasm and lactic
acid is a waste product. Uh for that um
what we have shown for the first time
with my colleague um uh Christos
Chinopoulos from Seml Weiss University
in Budapest um world expert on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation or mitochondrial
fermentation. Uh what we found is that
glutamine is used to produce energy in
the absence of oxygen through the
mitochondria
uh with the waste product of suinic acid
which is unbelievable because because uh
suxinic acid should never leave uh the T
the triricarbolic oxylic acid cycle the
KB cycle. It should stay in the cycle
and be used to generate energy through
oxidative phosphorilation. But what we
found was that glutamine is a
fermentable fuel inside the
mitochondria. So the mitochondria has
two ways to get energy. One is oxidative
phosphorilation using oxygen to generate
highly efficient energy. And the second
is this uh substrate level
phosphorilation which doesn't doesn't
use as much oxygen and can be producing
energy in the absence of oxygen. And how
do we know this? So we took our tumor
cells and we grew them in the absence of
glucose in glutamine under hypoxia in
the absence of oxygen the absence of
glucose and the cells are still making
ATP with glutamine. Where the hell is
that coming from? And we're seeing
suinic acid produced as a waste product.
Ah we got to Warberg knew nothing about
this pathway. This is the pathway
because you need the glutamine. It gives
you nitrogen for the synthesis of DNA
and RNA. It gives you energy through the
mitochondria in a non oxidative way. So
this this now clears up so much
misconfusion mis misunderstanding about
what Otto Berberg was saying. He did not
know about this pathway. Most of the
people today in the oncology research
field do not know about this pathway. We
have shown evidence now unambiguous that
this is a another fermentation pathway
that no one knew about. And now you have
glutamine and glucose as the two drivers
of the a production of ATP leading to
the disregul continuation of
disregulated growth because the
mitochondria's ability to generate
energy through oxfos has been diminished
falling back on these two fermentation
pathways one in the cytoplasm one in the
mitochondria. And this is very hard to
determine because when you look at a
cancer cell you say oh look at he's
taking in oxygen and he's making ATP. Of
course, it's oxidative phosphorilation.
What we have shown is the oxygen
consumption in a cancer cell is not used
for ATP synthesis. It's used for the
production of ROS, reactive oxygen
species, which are carcinogenic and
mutagenic. So you like you said the
chicken and the egg, they cause the
mutations in the nucleus coming from the
oxygen consumption. Therefore, they are
not the cause, they are the effects of
the destabilized energy coming from
inside the mitochondria. So the field
has been chasing effects for decades and
the cancer pi dead people are piling up
suffering immensely as the result of
this misunderstanding of the metabolism
of what cancer cells do and how to
manage it. So yes I just gave you a very
deep uh uh I gave you stuff that almost
nobody knows about yet we've published
this stuff and they scratched their head
I want I don't know what he's talking
about. Why don't you look at the
experiments and show how we went about
and found all this stuff and then I'm
think Warberg would be very pleased if
he were alive today to know what we have
done. His his original ideas were
correct. He just did not have the
appropriate the correct readouts to
quantify what what we what we're telling
today. Now we understand this. Now we
can move forward in managing cancer in a
logical and more effective and non-toxic
way allowing people to live far longer.
I don't know if it's a cure or not, but
all I can say is that they can live
longer with a higher quality of life
than than what is currently uh happening
in in all the major clinics throughout
the world.
Thank you so much. And this is
groundbreaking and what is lucky about
the current society is that anyone can
now go and find this research. So I
encourage all the listeners who are
interested in finding the truth to go
and seek out these papers because they
are not something that you will hear
from your doctor probably I would
assume.
And um before we go into the treatments
and the patient cases and the research
on that I would actually like to go back
a step and we just established that
disrupted mitochondria can't use oxygen.
they start fermenting glucose and
glutamine and the cell starts
proliferating uncontrollably because
mitochondrian important for preventing
the prol prolifer proliferation the
excessive one in the cell. So if we go a
step back what causes the damage of
mitochondria what is the root cause of
cancer? Okay, let let's first uh go back
a little bit um um because we can have
normal cells in our body grow very very
rapidly not using fermentation
metabolism. Let me give you an example.
The liver when we have liver re liver is
one organ that can regenerate. Okay,
it's called liver regeneration. Uh
regenerating liver cells can grow faster
than most kinds of tumors. If you take a
hepat um um um hepat hepatoma, which is
usually a um a cancer from liver, it's a
liver cancer. Hepatoma um coming from
hepatites, they ferment like crazy. They
grow in a disregulated way and they're
fermenting. However, if you cut a lobe
of your liver, you can regenerate the
liver and the hpatocytes proliferate
very very rapidly, but it's not
disregulated because they're using
oxidative phosphor. The mitochondria are
normal in those cells. So, they know
exactly how how uh they can grow very
fast and they know when to stop. uh the
he the the hepatoma grows fast and is
fermenting but doesn't know when to stop
because the organel controlling it is
defective. So we we we know that. So uh
this is another thing that's very
important to know the difference between
cancer cell division and and and uh and
normal cell division. And what's the
difference? One is that the mitochondria
healthy and the other one is the
mitochondria defect. Now getting back to
your question about what would cause uh
this disregulated cell growth to happen
in some organ and some tissue of a
person. Okay. So this was referred to as
the ankcogenic uh paradox by uh Albert
Sinorgi who received the Nobel Prize for
his work on on on vitamin C. He said
almost anything can cause cancer but
what is the common pathophysiological
mechanism by which all these provocative
things uh might trigger disregulated
cell growth. So he said oh carcinogens
can cause cancer. These are chemicals
toxic chemicals that lead to cancer and
call that's why they call them
carcinogens. Radiation people know
radiation causes cancer. um uh
intermittent hypoxia or intermittent
oxygen deficiency as Warberg clearly
clearly showed intermittent disruption
of uh of oxygen availability. Uh chronic
inflammation
uh can can uh lead to cancer. um certain
inherited mutations like p-53
leaframen many or the baa the bracka
mutation in the breast cancer any of
these can um lead to disregulated growth
and same with a older age uh also um
ankcogenic viruses like papilloma virus
um hepatitis C virus these things all
can produce cancer but what St. Gurgi
was concerned about and others. What is
the common pathophysiological
mechanism by which all these different
things uh either inherited or from the
environment could lead to disregulated
cell growth which is cancer. And I have
shown in my book uh and other papers
that every one of these provocative
cancer uh factors eliciting all disrupt
oxidative phosphorilation chronically
leading to a compensatory fermentation.
So whether it's radiation uh whether
it's intermittent hypoxia or or oxygen
inefficiency whether it's viruses
carcinogens radiation older age all of
them uh lead to a chronic disruption of
oxidative phosphorilation with a
compensatory fermentation because when
we look at the metabolism of all of
these tumors arising from anything
they're all fermenting so that's what
the link common linkage is so I we have
resolved the ankcogenic a paradox
showing that the common
pathophysiological mechanism is chronic
damage to oxidative phosphorilation
coupled to um compensatory fermentation.
This is exactly what Warberg show
suggested but we showed in all the
different forms of cancer that this is
exactly what's going on.
Can the way we eat these days can the
modern diet cause cancer?
Well, I I don't I I think it's a a a
compil a a combination of a lot of
things. Um
it's actually very difficult uh to get
cancer. Uh even though even though we're
all afflicted by it, you have to a
really put yourself in a lot of
different hazardous states for your
cells to grow in a disregulated way. You
have to realize it's our modern
lifestyle, diet and lifestyle that puts
us at risk uh for cancer. Uh we know
this because our closest uh biological
uh relative is the is the chimpanzee
uh 90 almost 98 and a half% similar in
protein sequence and genetic profile. Um
they have a brack one uh gene just like
a female. There's never been a
documented case of breast cancer in a
female chimpanzeee if you can believe
it. So how is it possible that this
organism uh which is genetically very
similar to us cancer is is extremely
rare. Uh also uh uh human tribe tribes
living to living according to
traditional ways cancer is extremely
rare. You know um Albert Schwitzer the
physician humanitarian didn't find
cancer in in 40,000 people he looked at
in these African tribes. Why? They're
human beings. Why they have no cancer?
because they're not they're not
partaking in the great uh western diet
and lifestyle uh like we have. So uh
what is it about our current diet and
lifestyle in all major western societies
that puts us at risk for cancer when our
uh uh Aboriginal ancestors didn't get
cancer uh initimos
very rare all tribes of humans that live
according traditional ways cancer is
extremely rare so clearly it's not a
genetic thing it's a diet and lifestyle
thing so uh when you and when you take
these folks that were living according
traditional ways and dramatically put
them in the western diet lifestyle, they
get obese, uh type 2 diabetes, cancer,
dementia, high blood pressure,
hypertension, all the same stuff that's
afflicting us that live in the in the
western society. So, it's clear within a
two generations you can go from being
healthy to being obese and sick. Uh so,
so what is it that's changed? Um and as
I said our uh culture uh our technology
has evolved so much faster than our
biology. We are still uh ba basically a
paleolithic or uh organism. Our biology
has hundreds of thousands of years in a
paleolithic diet and lifestyle. All of a
sudden within a within a hundred years
is thrown into a totally different kind
of environment. You also have to realize
that many cultures and societies evol
evolved in aronomy uh agricultural
natural agriculture uh not not
consumption of highly processed
carbohydrate foods that can be
transported all over the globe and still
appear to be uh looking good and and
health tasty uh where whereas this is a
very different kind of a situation that
existed even a hundred years ago. So
within the last 50 years we have become
highly techn technological uh uh we
don't exercise nearly as much a as we
used to. Uh we're eating highly large
amounts of highly processed
carbohydrates. We have a lot more
stress, emotional stress a as the result
of our advanced technologies causing
people to have all kinds of problems. So
lack of exercise, consumption of highly
processed carbohydrates, uh stress, uh
emotional stress that that seems to be
hammering us, uh stuck in front of
computers, cell phones, and sitting in
traffic. Well, you put all these things
together and you end up with a greater
number of chronic diseases. Type 2
diabetes, obesity, uh cancer, uh
dementia, uh all of these are the result
of our advancing technologies that our
bodies have not caught up with yet.
We're still living in a paleolithic. We
need to have a lot of exercise. We
shouldn't be eating highly processed
carbohydrate. Um we shouldn't be under
so much emotional stress. uh we we we we
we are put we put ourselves in in in in
this new state. And if you understand
biology and biochemistry and evolution,
you can figure out what you need to do
to attempt to to u mitigate or at least
lessen uh reduce uh some of these uh
conditions that will put put us at risk.
Diabetes has now replaced smoking as one
of the top risk factors for cancer. um
uh you know what's going on with this
and if people were really interested in
preventing cancer it would be rare to
find an obese person walking around.
Obviously people do not know how obesity
puts them at risk for cancer. Many
people with that are obese have type 2
diabetes. This is the result of systemic
inflammation.
systemic inflammation which damages
oxidative phosphorilation in a
particular also sleep apnea happens in
many obese people not all obese people
this is intermittent hypoxia an inter
interruption of oxygen deficiency
exactly what Warberg said so you you put
all this together and the cancer mystery
is not a mystery it's exactly what you
would have expected putting us in this
new new environment this is not a
mystery this is this is what we would
expect and this is exactly ly what we
have a disease out of control because
our lack of understanding of biology,
biochemistry and evolutionary biology
once you understand what I just said
this whole cancer problem is no is not a
mystery and it becomes very easy to
prevent it if people know what why they
need to do what they need to do
is none of this if is un
it's completely explainable
yeah it's almost like look at any
disease any disorder and any dysfunction
in human It's usually a combination of
just
very artificial living whether it's
technology, food or just disrupted
circadian rhythm.
Yes.
So yeah.
Yes. All of that.
Okay. So let's say there is this very
unfortunate I would say like a brutal
destiny that someone is getting cancer
is diagnosed with cancer. So now can you
tell about the work that you have done
with the cancer treatment and some of
the results that you've gotten and how
what's the state of the current
metabolic management of cancer?
Yeah. Well, we published the press pulse
therapeutic strategy for cancer. Problem
is uh unfortunately the great tragedy is
that oncologists and physicians have
never been trained in medical schools to
know anything about this. So what they
do is what they've been trained to do
and what they've been educated to do.
They follow standards of care for the
treatment. And if they never heard of
metabolic cancer as a mitochondrial
metabolic disease or know about how to
manage it, they will they have no clue.
And and the poor patients they go to
these uh physicians oncologists and ask
them I want metabolic therapy and they
say oh there's no evidence to support
this. There's no clinical trials. Where
are the clinical trials? Well, how are
you going to do a clinical trial when
when nobody really understands what
you're talking about? You have to
educate people to run a clinical trial
to know what they're doing, how to do
it. And you have to educate the the
patient themselves. So, um uh in
metabolic therapy, the patient
themselves play a large role. They are
they are empowered. They need to know
that their their cancer is driven by
glucose and glutamine and they are in
control of lowering blood sugar. They
can do that. Uh we developed the glucose
ketone index calculator which is a ratio
of blood ketone bodies to um um uh
ketone bodies to glucose uh uh in the
blood and uh when you do water only
fasting your GKI glucose ketone index
goes way down um it goes way down. Okay,
that means you're elevating ketones and
lowering blood sugar. The tumor cell
cannot use ketones for energy and it's
dependent on sugar. So you're lowering
the sugar that it absolutely needs and
you're elevating a fuel that it cannot
use. All right? But the rest of the body
can use it. Um so this is the first step
in the management of cancer is we need
to bring the patient back into a state
of metabolic homeostasis. We need to
return them to the condition that they
would have been in a paleolithic uh
lifestyle. Uh uh so we have to lower
sugar, elevate ketones and bring them
back into the zone. And once they're in
the zone, which could be achieved by
zero carbohydrate dieting, water only
fasting, a variety of different things.
Um, and it doesn't make any difference
whether it's a Mediterranean,
pescatarian, vegetarian, as long as you
can get your GKI down. And then your
body starts to get into this new
metabolic state. And now the tumor cells
become more and more vulnerable. So then
we can come in uh with low doses of of
of glutamine targeting drugs that really
push so many of these tumor cells over
the threshold of life to to death
without harming the body because the
body is now protected and and by the
ketones by this by the the state of
nutritional ketosis. So we can lower
even if we're using chemotherapy we can
lower the doses significantly. So
minimizing toxicity while enhancing
therapeutic benefit. And then we can use
non-invasive procedures to assess
whether or not we're successful. Uh you
can use CAT scan, MRIs, PET scan, all
these different ways to look at the
tumor and see whether or not it's going
away. Is it getting smaller or whatever.
And then you just stay the course and
you gradually degrade the tumor uh while
you're enhancing the health and vitality
of the rest of the body. We can we can
use radiation and we can use surgical
debulking. We can use all of these
things. We just have to know when and
how to use them at the appropriate time
in the overall management of the
disease. So we don't go we don't go into
this like a bull in a china shop
chopping this poor person apart,
poisoning them and doing all this
terrible stuff. We can do some of that
but in a more protracted way under the
right conditions when the patient now
becomes really really metabolically fit
and then we can go in and we can hammer
away at these tumor cells without
without inducing systemic tox toxicity.
So as I say to everybody we already have
all of the tools already available today
at this time to manage cancer
effectively. The problem is we do not
have trained personnel. We have the uh
uh governments that say cancer is a
genetic disease. We have a
pharmaceutical industry pushing all this
crazy stuff based on cancer as a genetic
disease. So when you put all that
together, hospitals are making a
fortune. The the granting agencies from
the federal governments are giving money
for these genomic screen mutation
screening stuff. Take that money, flush
it down the toilet. all all of our uh
private societies, breast cancer
societies, look at their uh scientific
advisory boards, they're all thinking
cancer is a genetic disease. As long as
the whole society and all the
institutions think cancer is a genetic
disease, what I just said is not going
to be done because they don't know
anything about it. They think cancer is
a genetic. So the theory of what the
disease is will drive both prevention
and management once it becomes
understood. It's just that I I see it,
but I but nobody else, not nobody, but
more and more people are starting to
understand what I'm saying. And when you
test the hypothesis and look at the
evidence, you can't but you can't help
but say this is the right way to do it.
Yeah. And to drive this point home,
could you maybe share a patient case
using this? Yeah. I we've published
several uh we publish them as case
reports in the scientific literature. Uh
so that others can say and you know we
get rid of oh there's only one person.
Oh that's only one person. Oh that's
only an anecdote. Well how many damn
anecdotes in one person's uh people uh
do you want to see before you realize
something's going on here. And Maggie
and Brad Jones they're they're doing the
documentary on our stuff on metabolic
therapy. Uh uh cataloging all of these
so-called flukes and anecdotes uh all
stage four terminal cancer patients that
are still alive. Um, so, uh, uh, so we
we have Pablo Kelly from England, Devon,
England, who's now a 10-year survivor
with glyobblasto.
Um, uh, Pablo H was diagnosed in 2014,
uh, with an inoperable, uh, glyo
glyopblasto. They wanted radiation and
chemo. He said, "No, I I don't want any
of that stuff." He has a very
interesting story. He's on the web. He
tells you about his his story. Um, he
asked me what I thought. I didn't at
that time we really didn't have as much
knowledge as we have now, but I said,
you know, do water only fasting and and
see what happens and go into keto and
avocados. He has a big stuff, all this
stuff. And uh, you know, uh, they said
he had an inoperable tumor and um, uh,
he didn't do anything except the
metabolic thing. And then after two and
a half, three years, the tumor grew
slowly. It didn't it didn't aggressively
kill him. uh it grew slowly and you
could see the MRI images. We published
it in Frontiers um uh in nutrition. You
can go and read the paper yourself.
Yeah, I'll definitely link it.
Yeah. Yeah. And you can see the tumor
growing. So, they did a debulking
surgery after about two years rather
than right up front because normally
they do it right away. You got to get
them in there, chop out that tumor. He
said no. Uh but the tumor didn't go
away. Uh and then he had it debulked and
he kept very accurate daily uh evidence
from his blood sugar and ketones. So we
could calculate his glucose ketone index
which was always quite low. Very nice.
Um and the tumor grew very slowly. So he
had it debulked cut out and then he
thought he was out of the woods because
now this inoperable tumor became
operable and the surgeon said we think
we got most of it if not all of it. So
he went slided back a little, slid a
little back to his diet and lifestyle
and all of a sudden that you could see
on the MRI that the uh tumor was growing
again. So this put the fear of God back
into Pablo where he then went back in a
deep dive on water only fasting and this
very restricted carbohydrate diet and
the tumor start stops growing again. So
it's very clear you could clearly see
what was going on. So uh then after
another couple three years he had a a
second debulking and then he had a third
debulking which was I think earlier this
year and he's still here. He's still
with us. He got married. He has two kids
now. Interesting. We always laugh about
it because they said Pablo has an
inoperable glyopblasto that has now been
operated on three times since he started
his metabolic therapy. So is he cured?
No. Is he still alive? Yes. living far
far longer than he would have been
predicted if had he done standard of
care. Then we had another woman a woman
from Cleveland, Ohio who had um
metastatic breast cancer spread to her
brain. Um she went to the Istanbul group
uh Dr. Slokum and Ikyiki
and she flew they gave her one month.
She failed all the radiation, chemo and
all the stuff they gave her. Um and then
she was rescued. She was in emergency
room there for for two for about three
weeks or something. Um but she's in
complete remission and she has sends us
pictures from her vacations in Hawaii.
Um you know this this kind of thing.
There's a Greek patient with um lung
cancer to the brain
who's out nine years now.
Um yeah anecdotes,
excuse me. But um we can't yet do
standard of uh uh clinical trial
because we don't have enough trained
people and we're still learning uh how
each person is a unique metabolic
entity. So we cannot always use the same
exact strategy on every person exactly
as we would do it for another person. So
we we modify the treatment as we go
through managing the disease. What is
the goal here? The goal is how long can
we keep a person alive with a diagnosed
stage 4 cancer longer than would have
been predicted by all of the statistics
that we see from cancer survivor data.
Okay. So when you get guys with a
glyopblasto living 10 years, this is
very rare. This doesn't happen very
often.
Absolutely. Same with lung cancer that
or breast cancer that metastasizes to
the brain. When you have cancer
metastasis from one organ to the brain,
usually that's pretty devastating. But
we're starting to get several of these
kinds of folks uh that have all these
metastatic can and we do know from our
research that I've done here at Boston
College, the metastatic cancer cell is
part macrofasage, heavily dependent on
glutamine. So, so we know how to manage
metastatic cancer. Uh because we
understand the biology of what the
nature of the tumor cell is. They need
the glucose and glutamine really really
good. Uh they need that. So we know how
to stop or manage this. Do we cure any?
I don't know. We we haven't been doing
this long enough. Uh I I published a
paper on a dog that was mass cell tumor
on the face that was cured. Uh but uh
because it died from old age from heart
disease. That's that's when you know
you're cured like you're a young lady.
God forbid you were diagnosed with
breast cancer. You did metabolic therapy
and you died at 96 years old from heart
disease. You obvious with cancer never
recurring. So therefore, you would have
said, "Well, yeah, I I was cured." But
you don't know that until you die from
old age from something other than what
you were diagnosed with.
So the goal here is not to say we can
cure cancer. The goal is to say, can we
live far longer with a qu a higher
quality of life than what would have
been previously predicted based on the
current status of how we treat these
people. That's the goal. Not to say, oh,
I can cure cancer. I don't know if we
can cure cancer. All I know is that we
can allow people to live a hell of a lot
longer. And I think that's a great
success when you think about it.
Absolutely. I think any hope in in
cancer treatment and for cancer patients
is highly welcomed. One thing I'm
curious about is that we know that
lifestyle contribute cancer after this
discussion. Uh can we use our lifestyle,
let's say, can we utilize metabolic
strategies um intermittent fasting or
fasting or ketogenic diets um maybe
every now and then to prevent cancer?
Would would that be efficacious?
Oh, absolutely. The the problem is the
temptation
uh uh for the foods and conveniences of
our of our current uh cultures and
lifestyles make it very hard to do that.
Um
do we want to go back and live like a
caveman uh you know killing deer and
eating whatever you can find? um you
know uh or or do we want to recognize
that maybe some level of moderation in
uh or maybe we can improve our exercise
to be more regular. Maybe we can find
ways to reduce stress. Maybe maybe we
can try to eat locore. That means um uh
foods that are are grown locally. It's a
new term in in the Webster's dictionary.
Locafhore. It means eating foods that
are grown naturally in your in your
local environment. No, no long-term
shelf life, you know, this kind of
stuff. Um, all natural organic kinds of
things. Um, and I know that's hard uh uh
to do that. Uh, but I I just think that
yeah, you could prevent you could reduce
the risk of getting cancer significantly
if you know what causes it. uh damage to
oxidative phosphorilation with
compensatory substrate level
phosphorilation is the origin of cancer.
How would you prevent that? Well, you
prevent that by keeping your
mitochondria healthy because it's very
hard to get cancer when your
mitochondria remain healthy. How do you
keep your mitochondria healthy? Regular
exercise. Don't use don't eat as much
highly processed carbohydrates. Keep
your stress management under control. Do
whatever you can to feel better. um uh
all of these things, you know, smoking
uh uh of course, you know, was always a
a risk factor in in cancer. Um we try to
we're trying to reduce the risk factors
and improve those things that we can
improve and that would significantly
reduce cancer. The the problem is when
people are told that cancer is a genetic
disease, they feel that there's nothing
they can do. They're they're faded to be
this. This is nuts. This is not true.
This is not true. That's why can cancer
is not a genetic disease. It's a
mitochondrial metabolic disease that we
largely control.
And that with with proper lifestyle, we
could prevent.
Oh, absolutely. You can prevent 80% of
cancers by just knowing what I said. uh
you can live longer without debilitating
these because don't forget you got type
two diabetes, hypertension, I all of
these things are the result of bad diet
lifestyle and cancer is one of them,
dementia is another one you know
Alzheimer's disease all these kinds of
things they damage the neurons in the
brain the next thing you know you have
early onset Alzheimer's disease and this
kind of stuff so a lot of this stuff is
is preventable
and uh for cancer it's certainly
manageable as
Yeah. So,
we kind of answered to this question.
What is the best way to prevent cancer?
But there was one question from the
listeners which I would like to um ask
you which is are there supplements that
can maybe reduce the risk of cancer.
Um the best way is is nutritional
ketosis. Um I I I I know because the
metab I know what the um how that works.
It's unbelievable. It's a it's a it's
such a beautiful when when the cells
take in ketones um the energy efficiency
of the mitochondria becomes uh much
greater and reactive oxygen species are
reduced. whether a supplement I mean
some people drink ketones but it's
basically um water only fasting and and
low carbohydrate getting a low GKI uh
however you want to do that uh is is
therapeutic to prevent to to prevent
cancer as far as popping a pill or
eating something I I I I don't know
whatever can elevate ketones and reduce
glucose is your um strategy that can
that can help with with I can't speak to
any supplement maybe a ketone supplement
or something like this but uh even that
it comes more natur from the natural
body itself that will prevent the
cancer.
What do you think about screening and
things like full body MRI as a
preventive method?
Um I I I I don't know why anybody would
want to do that. um uh why why would you
subject yourself uh to any of these
kinds of things unless unless you had a
lump or a bleed or something that would
be a little unusual. I mean if you can
catch it um u naturally you know
biopsies as I've said and I've published
um uh can spread in some people can
spread the cancer all around. Why why we
won't want to stick something in
screening procedures or or this kind of
thing? Um there there's we haven't
developed them yet, but they're called
liquid biopsies which can screen people
for cancer without sticking you or
causing any kind of a surgical uh
disruption. Uh those these might be the
future. There's a lot of false positive
and false negatives still associated
with that. So we just have to wait with
with that. But as I said, if you try to
change your diet and lifestyle, you
probably have a better chance of
preventing cancer uh in the first place.
So, um, but again, you know, and then we
have people in societies that want to
live like a caveman. You know, they eat
only raw or cooked deer meat or elk
meat. They they don't eat any
carbohydrates. They're they're pretty
pretty u you know, rough kinds of
people. Um, but you know, that's not the
majority of folks that that exist, you
know, but there's always those kinds
that do this. But yeah, so I don't know
about supplements. I I I don't
maybe there's some things that you could
take that don't harm that can enhance
your mitochondria but whatever it is
that's what you always have to think
about how is that going to enhance my
mitochondrial function without causing
reactive oxygen stasis.
Thank you. So what would be the good
places to find more about this theory?
Absolutely your book. Most of what I
have said today is published in open
access papers. So all anybody says and I
can't uh everybody's the comments that
you'll see. Oh, he didn't tell you about
lymphoma. Oh, he didn't say this or all
of everything that I'm saying is in
these papers. I can't cover every base
right now. I'd be here for three days
talking to you. But but if you read the
papers that I published, it it covers
all of the different cancers. Uh the I
we haven't found any that can live with
that can grow without fermentation.
Maybe there's a rare cancer that we
never know about, but but all of the
major cancers are fermentative dependent
on glucose and glutamine. All of them
open access. People can look at the data
for themselves. Um work with somebody if
you don't know. I try to I understand
some of it can be quite heavy and
biochemical but uh there's some parts of
it that everybody can understand. Any
literate person can read it and say I
understand that. So that's all there and
and our work is largely supported by
private foundations and philanthropy. So
um uh we like it when people donate to
Travis Kristofferson's foundation or
through my Boston College University
website. Um and we keep the research
going so we can then provide uh the
future of cancer management uh the way
we think it should be and we test
everything preclinally before we
recommend it in human clinical settings.
So I I I vet I troubleshoot all this
kind of stuff and then we can talk to
clinicians and then they can apply it to
their patients uh without fear of
harming the patient knowing that we have
evidence that this could be very
powerful if done correctly.
Thank you so much, Professor Seafid, of
this uh conversation today and your
contributions to the field. Oh,
thank you very much, Inc. It was very
nice to be here.
[Music]